Podiatrist<>Podiatrists are specialists in the feet and the lower limbs. They treat and manage pain and diseases, aswell as injuries, to help keep people active and pain free. A lot of common issues are treatable bypodiatrists, such as bunions. They can also help with ongoing issues or injuries.&
General Practitioner<>A general practitioner is trained to provide healthcare to patients of any sex or age. Generalpractitioners often work as primary care physicians (PCPs), see their patients regularly, and are familiarwith their medical backgrounds. Most people do (or should) see a PCP at least once a year. When yoususpect something else is going on, your first stop is a PCP since they're responsible for your overall careand well-being. They can then refer you to the right specialist.&
Pediatrician<>A pediatrician is a doctor that specializes in childhood medicine, or those under 18. Some pediatricianswill see their patients until they are 21. Pediatricians oversee the health and development of babies andchildren. They administer vaccines. keep track of a child's growth, and are the first contact when a childa sick.&
Endocrinologist<>Endocrinologists specialize in glands and all the hormones they produce. Endocrinologists commonlytreat diabetes, thyroid dysfunction, and reproductive health. You may see an endocrinologist for any ofthe above, and will usually be referred by your PCP if you report symptoms or have relateddiscrepancies in your blood work. Some endocrinologists do focus specifically on one area of the body.For example, a reproductive endocrinologists focuses on the reproductive system, and people oftenwork with these doctors when seeking fertility treatments.&
Neurologist<>A neurologist focuses on the anatomy, functions, and disorders of the nerves and nervous systems.Neurologists work with people who have had strokes and those with degenerative diseases of thenervous system, like multiple sclerosis. If you exhibit loss of motor of cognitive function, you could bereferred to a neurologist.&
Rheumatologist<>A rheumatologist is a specialist in internal medicine of joints, muscles, and bones. Another specialist onour list, an orthopedist, also works with the joints, muscles, and bones, but a rheumatologist is uniquebecause they focus on the origin of the problem, and the body's overall movement and health.Orthopedists tend to focus on more acute areas of pain and injury. We'll get into more aboutorthopedists later. One of the main reasons to see a rheumatologist is because of arthritis, but they alsowork with patients who have tendinitis, lupus, gout, and more, to manage chronic pain.&
Allergist/Immunologist<>Allergist/Immunologists are trained to treat allergies and disease of the immune system, such asasthma. If allergies can't be managed by over the counter medicines, you may see an allergist. You mayalso go to an allergist/immunologist if you need ongoing support managing an autoimmune disease, likeCeliac disease.&
Psychiatrist<>Psychiatrists focus exclusively on mental health. You may see a psychiatrist if you believe you havesymptoms of mental illness. People usually seek out psychiatrists themselves, but some PCP's now areadding mental health screenings to yearly checkups, and may provide a referral. Psychiatrists canspecialize in more than one mental illness, and can also specialize in treating substance abuse.Psychiatrists can informally specialize in specific age groups, though some informally prefer to work withdifferent ages and on different illnesses as they gain experience with patients.&
Nephrologist<>Nephrology is a specialty that focuses on diseases of the kidneys. Nephrologists deal with failure andserious chronic conditions of the kidneys. If your PCP suspects you have a kidney specific disease, theywill refer you to a nephrologist.&
OB/GYN obstetrician/gynecologist<>An obstetrician/gynecologist, this title is commonly shortened to OB/GYN. Gynecologists specialize indiseases of the female reproductive organs, and obstetricians specialize in pregnancy and childbirth.Doctors often specialize in both so that they can help patients with a full range of reproductivemedicine. Common reasons for visiting an OB/GYN are: you're seeking a contraceptive method, areexperience irregular period symptoms or pelvic pain, or are seeking prenatal care. It's alsorecommended that patients with female reproductive organs have an exam by the OB/GYN once peryear.&
Pulmonologist<>Pulmonologists focus on the the respiratory organs — the lungs, airway and respiratory muscles. the APCP will refer you to a pulmonologist if you have a respiratory infection or a chronic issue, like COPD orsleep apnea.&
Surgeon<>A surgeon's primary function is to perform surgery. They analyze a patient's health and history, andcreate a surgical plan that prioritize the patient's safety and recovery. They also coordinate other staffthat participates in surgery, and work with other physicians post-op.You might see a surgeon for a variety of reasons. Surgeries are typically scheduled in advance, exceptemergency surgery. Surgeries can be major or minor, and have varying recovering times. Surgeons canspecialize in many areas of medicine. Common specializations are cardiac surgeons, orthopedicsurgeons, and emergency surgeons.&
Emergency Physician<>Emergency physicians are trained as physicians, and then go through additional training to master theirskills in acute diagnosis in illness and injury. You will see an emergency physician if experiencing amedical emergency and in the emergency room in a hospital. Medical professionals assess a condition inorder to determine the immediacy of a medical emergency, and then doctors diagnose, prescribetreatment, and decide whether or not a patient needs to be admitted to the hospital.&
Ophthalmologist<>An ophthalmologist is a type of eye doctor who is trained and certified to provide eye care and performoral surgery. You would see an ophthalmologist if your PCP or optometrist suspects you have a moreserious eye disease, or might need surgery. Some people choose to see ophthalmologists for annual eyeexams as well.&
Oncologist<>Oncologists are doctors that deal with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. You will seean oncologist if your usual doctor suspects you have cancer. Your oncologist will order tests, confirm,diagnose, and stage your cancer. They will also develop and oversee your treatment plan. Many otherpeople will be involved in a cancer care team, but an oncologist is the leader of that team.Oncologists have a wide range of specialties, and almost all of them further specialize once theycomplete their oncology training. Oncologists can specialize in most types of cancer.&
Urologist<>A urologist specializes in function and treatment of the urinary system. If your PCP thinks thinks youhave symptoms a urinary disease, such as excessive urinating, they will refer you to a urologist.Urologists often work with other doctors to treat illnesses; for example, a urologist may be involved intreating prostate of bladder cancer alongside an oncologist.&
Otolaryngologist<>Otolaryngologists are often referred to as ENTs, for Ear, Nose, and Throat. ENTs work with diseases ofthe ear, nose, and throat, hence the nickname. You may see an ENT for infections or for chronic issueslike a deviated septum.&
Anesthesiologist<>Anesthesiologists are pain managers. They oversee pain medications, and administer them duringsurgeries; we mostly know anesthesiologists as the ones who \put us to sleep\ for surgery, andadminister a wide range of pain medicines. Though you're unlikely to see an anesthesiologist outside ofthe hospital, you'll work with one before and after surgery to make sure you're not in pain and yourbody is healthy overall. Some anesthesiologists do work with patients in the maintenance of chronicpain, and other specialize in different areas of medicine like pediatrics or obstetrics.&
Dermatologist<>A dermatologist is a doctor specializing in the skin. Dermatologists treat chronic and short-term,including cancer, psoriasis, and acne. A primary care doctor would refer you to a dermatologist if a skincondition was beyond the scope of their understanding, or needed more advances care.&
Radiologist<>Radiologists specialize in diagnosing and treating illnesses using medical imaging. Radiologists work withMRIs, CT scans, X-rays, and PET scans. They can decide what tests to run, oversee the tests, and reviewthem to make a diagnosis. Radiologists often work with other care providers; for example, if you cameinto the ER with a head injury, you would see an emergency doctor, a radiologist, and possible othersdepending on the diagnosis and extent of the injury.Radiologists specialize in the types of diseases they diagnose, such as radiation oncology. They can alsospecialize in interventional or diagnostic radiology, and can help provide diagnoses and treatment plansdepending on their specializations.&
Gastroenterologist<>A gastroenterologist is a doctor who manages the treatment of diseases of the gastrointestinal tract andthe liver. Persistent symptoms like stomach pain, heartburn, and diarrhea could send you to thegastroenterologist.&
Cardiologist<>Cardiologists treat and diagnose problems with the heart and blood vessels. Cardiologists focus onpreventative care, while a cardiac surgeon is responsible for surgery.Usually, a primary care physician will refer a patient to a cardiologist if the PCP suspects something isn’tright with the heart and cardiovascular system. The cardiologist can then run tests and decide on atreatment plan. Some sub-specialties include invasive or noninvasive cardiologists. Invasive means thatthey perform tests that are internal, while noninvasive cardiologists only perform tests that are external,like echocardiograms.&
Orthopedist<>Orthopedic doctors treat musculoskeletal problems. They often work with injuries like broken bones,torn ligaments, etc. Orthopedists can also treat chronic issues in the hips, back, and neck, as well as treatarthritis.You’re the most likely to see an orthopedist if you’ve sustained an injury. Some injuries will heal on theirown, but injuries that cause serious pain and greatly decreased mobility should be looked at by anorthopedist.&
Dentist<>A dentist, also known as a dental surgeon, is a health care professional who specializes in dentistry (the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases and conditions of the oral cavity). The dentist's supporting team aids in providing oral health services. The dental team includes dental assistants, dental hygienists, dental technicians, and sometimes dental therapists.&
physiotherapist<>A physiotherapist works with patients to develop customized programs designed to restore as much as possible their functional ability and movement. They are trained to help patients at all stages of life - from infant to old age.&